Page 1:


Page 2:
AMRITA



Page 3:
Dewdrops

Verily, love is death, and death is life to come.

Man returneth not again; the stream floweth not uphill; the old
life is no more; there is a new life that is not his.

Yet that life is of his very essence; it is more He than all that he
calls He.

In the silence of a dewdrop is every tendency of his soul, and of
his mind, and of his body; it is the Quintessence and the
Elixir of his being. Therein are the forces that made him and
his father and his father’s father before him.

This is the Dew of Immortality.

Let this go free, even as It will; thou art not its master, but the
vehicle of It.

Crowley, The Book of Lies



Page 4:
AMRITA

Essays in Magical Rejuvenation

Aleister Crowley

Edited with an introduction by
Martin P. Starr

THELEMA PUBLICATIONS
Kings Beach


Page 5:
First edition
published in 1990 by
Thelema Publications
P. O. Box 1393
Kings Beach, California 95719 U. S. A.

Introduction and editing © 1990 Martin P. Starr
Amrita © 1990 Ordo Templi Orientis
Frontispiece: “De Alchymistis” © 1990 J. Daniel Gunther
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Crowley, Aleister, 1875-1947.
Amrita: essays in magical rejuvenation / Aleister Crowley;

edited with an introduction by Martin P. Starr.—1st ed.
cm,
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-913576-18-2 (alk. paper) : $19.95 (est.).—ISBN
0-913576-19-0 (deluxe: alk. paper) : $49.95 (est.)
1. Medicine, Magic, mystic, and spagiric. 2. Rejuvenation.
3. Elixir of life. I. Starr, Martin P., 1959— Il. Title.
RZ999.C86 1990

131—dc20 90-44839

CIP

© The paper used in this publication meets the minimum
requirements of the American Standard for Permanence of Paper
for Printed Library Materials 739, 48-1984

Contents

Foreword
Soror Grimaud
vii

Introduction
Martin P. Starr
1x

A.M.R.LT.A.
1

The Elixir of Life: Our Magical Medicine
3

The Elixir of Life (I)
15

The Elixir of Life (II)
21

The Order of the Purifications on Waking
39

Remarkable Experiment with the Elixir of Life
41

AMRITA
43

Additional Cases
47

IT
51

On Food
53


Page 6:
Foreword

Amrita is a collection of many “starts” by Aleister Crowley
to present a method of restoring youth and energy—the
central secret of life. Crowley was aware that ill-informed,
ignorant abuse might discredit this High Art of Magick,
which requires proper preparation and concentration, and
so his words were guarded. Yet as one who proclaimed
that “Mystery is the Enemy of Truth,” he also knew that
“the secret knowledge has quite adequate warders.”
Crowley was a perfectionist, striving ever for the ulti-
mate Truth. He made many attempts to explain the Unex-
plainable, to make the path clear to all. As he wrote in
Konx Om Pax, “Dear children of earth, long have you
wandered in darkness; quit the night, and seek the day!
Seek not to imitate the language of the wise; ’tis easy.
There is no royal road to illumination: that which I say in
Light is truth to the Children of the Light; to them of
! darkness is a confusion and a snare.”
With veneration for the Magus of the Aquarian Age, we
offer this book for your scrutiny, to aid your advancement
|

in the Light.

Soror GRIMAUD

aa


Page 7:
Introduction

This volume is a collection of Aleister Crowley’s writings
on occult medicine, particularly the Amrita, the Central
Secret of the Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.), a masonic-
type Order, purportedly derived from the eighteenth cen-
tury Rosicrucians, which openly claimed to possess “the
secret of the Stone of the Wise, of the Elixir of Immortal-
ity, and of the Universal Medicine.”! The Sanskrit word
amrita means “immortality” or “immortal nectar”; from it
is derived the Greek ambrosia, the nectar of the gods. What
was the basis for such an extraordinary claim? Crowley,
ever eager to lift the veil and yet constrained by an oath of
secrecy, coupled with his own sense of magical propriety,
reveals much here of the theoretical basis for the type of
magical rejuvenation—often expressed under the symbol-
ism of Alchemy—which he practiced and taught from
1912 until his death in 1947. To understand the importance
in Crowley’s life of his quest for the Elixir, some back-
ground follows.

Crowley’s first interest in Occultism was the study of
the vast literature of Alchemy. By his own account, he
read much and understood little. His attempt to show off
his new-found knowledge in a Swiss beer hall led to his
initiation in November 1898 into the Hermetic Order of
the Golden Dawn, an occult sodality which had a
“Rosicrucian” Second Order whose ritual was based on
the legend of Christian Rosencreutz in the Fama Frater-
nitatis (1614). The first rule of the Rosicrucians mentioned

1 [Aleister Crowley, hereafter cited as Crowley], “Liber LIT:
Manifesto of the O.T.O." in The Equinox 3 (1): 200 (1919).

Ix


Page 8:
AMRITA

in the Fama was that the members of the Order should
profess nothing but to heal the sick, and that gratis. Al-
though the Golden Dawn’s Second Order offered a smat-
tering of Alchemy, interpreted along the lines of
Ceremonial Magic, medicine, occult or otherwise, was
not part of the program. Crowley was admitted to the
Second Order in 1900, in the midst of a battle for hegemo-
ny between its creator, S. L. Mathers, and his rebellious
London adepti. Crowley had access to the Order’s secret
“Z.2” document prior to his admission, but he thought
little of the section on Alchemy, which he dismissed as
“the most grotesque rubbish.”? There is no evidence,
however, that he made any attempt to employ the Z.2
alchemical instructions.

The collapse of the Golden Dawn at the turn of the
century was followed by Crowley losing faith in Mathers,
and ultimately claiming, as a result of the “Cairo Work-
ing” and the reception of The Book of the Law in 1904, to
have supplanted him as the Chief Adept. Acting on the
commands given him in this work, Crowley published in
his journal, The Equinox, the secret teachings of the Gold-
en Dawn, including the Second Order ritual, which ap-
peared in the March, 1910 issue. Mathers sued to restrain
publication, claiming to be the chief of the Rosicrucian
Order; his defeat by Crowley and the attendant publicity
resulted in the latter being deluged by innumerable “sole
authentic Chiefs” of the Order. One of the more persistent
of these was Theodor Reuss,* Frater Superior and Outer
Head in mundo of the Ancient Order of Oriental Templars.

2 Crowley, Magick in Theory and Practice (1930), 40n.

3 Theodor Reuss, (1855-1923). There is evidence of contact be-
tween Reuss and Crowley prior to 1910. The Constitution of the Ancient
Order of Oriental Templars O.T.O. (dated January 1906), has on its
cover a simplified version of the lamen designed by Crowley c. March
1907 and used on the case of J. F.C. Fuller’s book on
“Crowleyanity,” The Star in West (1907)

x

Introduction

The O.T.O. was formed on the basis of a charter
granted in 1902 by John Yarker, an English Masonic en-
thusiast and antiquarian, to Reuss and two colleagues,
who worked it as a college of rites, combining all the
various Masonic degrees into one system. To this purely
exoteric structure was added a highly unconventional in-
terpretation of the symbolism of Freemasonry and Her-
metism: the key to understanding was sexual magic. But
to the outer world the O.T.O. was indistinguishable
from other “fringe” or pseudo-Masonic bodies which
originated in the nineteenth century, save for the fact that
it was co-masonic, meaning that it admitted men and
women on an equal basis, a fact which automatically
put it outside the accepted landmarks of regular Ma-
sonry.

By the time of his meeting with Reuss, Crowley had
already pursued an unorthodox Masonic career. Although
he must have been aware that the founders of the Golden
Dawn were all regular Freemasons and that their rituals—
including his initiation to the Order—took place in hired
Masonic halls, Crowley was first initiated into Masonry in
Mexico in 1900, where he was pushed through to the 33°
on the request of one Don Jesus de Medina-Sidonia. Even-
tually finding to his dismay that his Mexican initiation
gave him no standing in England, Crowley in June 1904
applied for membership in the Parisian “Anglo-Saxon
Lodge No. 343,” working under a charter from the
Grande Loge de France; he was raised to Master Mason on
December 17, 1904. Crowley’s liberal interpretation of
Masonic brotherhood was not met by an equal for-
bearance on the part of the official bodies, as the United
Grand Lodge of England, the ruling English authority,
considered the Grande Loge de France to be irregular.
Despite an appeal in 1913 to the Grand Secretary, Sir
Edward Letchworth, Crowley never obtained recognition
in England as a regular member of the Craft.

Xt


Page 9:
AMRITA

When Reuss came to call on Crowley in 1910, he at once
offered Crowley the VII° of the O.T.O., which was con-
sidered to be the equivalent of the 33° of the Ancient and
Accepted Rite. By this time Crowley’s interest in Free-
masonry had cooled considerably, as he thought it “either
vain pretence, tomfoolery, an excuse for drunken rowdi-
ness, or a sinister association for political intrigues and
commercial pirates.”4 Reuss attempted to convince
Crowley that there were a few men who took Freemason-
ry seriously, and, more importantly, that the rites con-
cealed profound magical secrets. Crowley was bored by
Reuss and found him overbearing, so he was quickly sent
packing.

Reuss again visited Crowley in the spring of 1912,
claiming that Crowley had clearly published ‘the secret of
the IX° of the O.T.O. in one of his books; he denied doing
so and Reuss straightaway pointed out the passage in ques-
tion, thereby astonishing its author, who had attributed no
significance to it. Reuss insisted on admitting Crowley to
the IX°, and binding him to an oath of secrecy. Reminisc-
ing about Reuss’ explanation of the [X° formula, Crowley
noted that “the secret as at that time possessed by the
Order was in a very crude and unscientific form and there
was no explanation of the conditions which had to be
brought about to get it to work, and I spent many years
of experiment finding out what those conditions were.”5
At first Crowley made only sporadic experiments with
this formula. After he noticed how successful these ca-
sual workings had been, Crowley began in September
1914 to keep a diary of his opera. For the rest of his life
Crowley practised the O.T.O. techniques in preference to
the elaborate ceremonial methods he had _ learned

4 The Confessions of Aleister Crowley, ed. John Symonds & Ken-
neth Grant (1969), 628 (hereafter cited as Confessions).

5 Crowley to David Curwen, October 9, 1945, G. J. Yorke
Collection.

|
|

Introduction

in the Golden Dawn; he frankly considered the [X° secret a
labor-saving device.

Reuss had chartered Crowley in 1912 to head the
O.T.O. in England and English-speaking countries and
asked him to revise the rituals and instructions. Crowley
worked closely with Reuss in London, where a lodge had
been established, and he completed the revision of the
rituals—several of which were but slight variations upon
the “Emulation” Workings—up to the VI°, substantially
rewrote the instruction paper for the IX°, Agape (Liber C):
The Book of the Unveiling of the Sangraal wherein it is spoken
of the Wine of the Sabbath of the Adepts and composed his
personal comment thereon, De Arte Magica secundum Ritum
Gradus Nonae O.T.O.,° as well as other degree docu-
ments. Their collaboration was ended by the outbreak of
the War and the departure of Crowley for America.

During his American period (1914-1919) Crowley
made repeated attempts to nurture the establishment of the
O.T.O. in the New World, but here he met with little
success. Other than his dedicated student Charles
Stansfeld Jones in British Columbia and his associates,
Crowley had no organized following in North America.
Crowley’s power for what he termed “magnetic repul-
sion” seemed to gain him adherents about as fast as he lost
them and scandal soon followed his name. Owing to ob-
jections by American Masons, Crowley again rewrote the
O.T.O. “Blue Lodge” (Minerval to III°) rituals to remove
all references to the Hiramic legend of Craft Masonry, but
that was not enough to make the movement popular. His
attempts to put himself forward as an occult teacher
largely fell on deaf ears.

For the most part Crowley’s occult work in America
was carried on privately as he attempted to refine his un-

6 Agape is published in The Secret Rituals of the O.T.O., ed. Fran-
cis King (1973); De Arte Magica is published in Crowley on Christ, ed.
Francis King (1974).

Xt


Page 10:
AMRITA

derstanding and application of the [X°, of which his diaries
for the period give ample proof of his efforts. An early
account of his work is contained here in the essay “The
Elixir of Life (I)”; the “accompanying photographs” men-
tioned in the article have not survived. One high point in
his personal development was his undertaking a “great
magical retirement” near Bristol, New Hampshire in the
summer of 1916. Here he experimented with magical re-
juvenation and obtained striking results, detailed in the
section of Amrita entitled “Remarkable Experiment with
the Elixir of Life.” 7

Crowley returned to England December 1919, and im-
mediately took up plans to establish a community based
on the principles he had gleaned from The Book of the Law.
On April 1st 1920 Crowley founded his Abbey of Thelema
near the Sicilian village of Cefalti; following the Rosicru-
cian tradition, he called his small settlement the “Col-
legium ad Spiritum Sanctum.” Here he once again took up
his research on magical rejuvenation, the results of which
are represented here by the essay “The Elixir of Life (II).”
To draw new members to the Abbey he devised a plan to
promote it as a health resort, where patients could be treat-
ed according to O.T.O. methods. He had stationery
printed up, listing his various imaginary medical degrees,®
including “M.D. Damc.”—Damcar being the mythical
home of the Arab wise men mentioned in the Fama Frater-
nitatis. In reality, the closest Crowley had come to conven-
tional medical training was listening to the conversations
of his Cambridge friend Ivor Back, a noted surgeon.
Closer to home, the most pressing health problem facing

7 See Confessions, 807-808 of which this is an adaptation.

8 It in part reads “Director-Chief: Sir Aleister Crowley A.. A..,
R. R. et A. C.; M.D. Damce.; Trinity College Cambridge; King’s
College Hospital London, Ph.D. Al. K.” An example of the letterhead
(with a prescription written on it in Crowley's hand) survives in the
Yorke Collection.

XIV

Introduction

Crowley at the Abbey was his dependence on heroin and
other drugs, which habit he was trying unsuccessfully to
break. His theories on treatment were developed in his
roman 4 clef The Diary of a Drug Fiend (1922); Crowley’s
character is called “Basil King Lamus,” who “was a very
skilled physician, though he never studied medicine of+
ficially.”9 Alas, he had not much time to put his theories
into practice. Crowley was expelled from Italy by orders
of Mussolini in 1923; by his own admission, the Abbey
failed just as all his other ventures had failed.

Crowley next took up advertising for his Amrita—
often written with full stops between the letters, implying
that it is a magical formula—in 1932. By this time he had
wandered back to England, where he remained for the rest
of his life. He lectured for a fee of ten guineas on October
5, 1932 at the National Laboratory of Psychical Research,
at the invitation of the famous ghost-hunter Harry Price.1°
His speech, “The Elixir of Life: Our Magical Medicine,”
was originally entitled “Psychic Rejuvenation,” as
Crowley wrote, “I had to drag in the loathsome word
‘psychic’ to please Harry Price.” Press coverage brought a
number of inquiries regarding his treatment, though the
stiff price made some wonder what they were to receive
for the money beyond massage and diets.

Was it effective? The most detailed record of treatment
is Crowley’s own case; his “Interim Report” of 1933 is
rather sketchy at best. Some of the results he claimed, such
as total cure of his asthma, were not permanent; his expla-
nation was that “Elfixir]. only works for a short spasm on
bodies not properly purified.”!1 He remarked to his col-
league Gerald Yorke that “the IX degree doesn’t replace

9 Crowley, The Diary of a Drug Fiend (1922), 35.

10 My thanks to the Hon. Alan Wesencraft, Curator of the Harry
Price Library, University of London, for copies of the Price-Crowley
correspondence.

11) Crowley, diary, November 14, 1933, Yorke Collection.

XV


Page 11:
AMRITA

regular treatment, indeed ought not to be used when one
is full of poison.”!2 Crowley further admitted three snags
in his programme: “(1) People find old illnesses recurring.
This is therefore the poisons left by them working out
(also sometimes when the treatment is a strain). (2) People
revolt at the discipline as such. (3) People suddenly get a
glimpse of the eternal-life-struggle-burden. The Will to
die. This too is a sign of confidence in success.”!3 Clearly
Crowley did not think of his treatment as a panacea; the
aim was more in line with the Hindu notion of repeated
rejuvenation than with the Semitic idea of eternal life.

Despite the disastrous outcome of his libel action in
1934, leading to his bankruptcy in 1935, Crowley never
stopped trying to make a commercial enterprise out of his
Amrita therapy. In September 1935, he proposed to estab-
lish a clinic in London’s West End to handle patients dur-
ing the first part of the treatment, lasting from three to six
months. The last month of the treatment, when the
Amrita was administered to patients in pill form, de-
manded a dry climate for optimal results. Crowley
sought, but did not find, £2,000 in capital, to be used
in purchasing various types of lamps and “electric baths”
he found beneficial. He made a final attempt in 1938 to
establish a clinic at 6 Hasker Street, s.w.3, where he was
known to tradesmen as “Dr. Crowley”; his partner in the
venture quickly lost interest and so brought the matter toa
close.

For the last decade of his life, Crowley largely busied
himself with writing and publishing, and took in few pa-
tients, being in failing health himself; he also tried to run,
at a considerable distance, the American branch of the
O.T.O., Agape Lodge in Hollywood and later Pasadena,
California, which was under the leadership of Wilfred T.

12 Crowley to Yorke, May 10, 1938, Yorke Collection.
13. Crowley, undated note, Yorke Collection.

XVI

Introduction

Smith.14 As could be expected from past efforts and the
inevitable clash of personalities, Crowley found little satis-
faction with Agape Lodge, the sole lodge of the O.T.O.
under his jurisdiction. Although Smith did not think any
of the lodge brethren worthy of the IX°, Crowley be-
stowed the secrets on a few of them he deemed prepared;
he even took the trouble to summarize the teachings in an
unpublished document entitled “IX° Emblems and Modes
of Use.” Crowley was concerned that the O.T.O. should
have body of leaders trained in its secrets and so he rather
swiftly conferred the secret on anyone of promise. The
situation was the same in England, where the exiguity of
members led Crowley to initiate hastily his friend Louis
Wilkinson just to have a witness for the swearing in of
another IX° candidate.

Toward the end of his life Crowley grew doubtful of
the utility of the rituals he had structured to lead by steps
to the disclosure of the IX°; the pace of the world had
changed so much since 1912 that he questioned whether
there would ever be sufficient leisure again to work the
rituals as he originally intended. Crowley asked his stal-
wart follower Karl Germer to devise a new method for the
progressive transmission of the secret. The task was be-
yond Germer’s ability and Crowley had not the energy left
to do it himself, so he relied on a simple method of testing
candidates: “find out from the ample hints and indications
what the Amrita consists of and then you can tell me and I
am compelled to swear you in.”!5 Not all were impressed
with the secret thus revealed, however.

Crowley stressed time and again that he kept the central

14 Wilfred Talbot Smith (1885-1957); he is the subject of my
forthcoming study, The. Unknown God, which covers in detail the
Thelemic movement in the United States and its interactions with
Crowley.

15 Crowley to David Curwen, October 9, 1945, Yorke
Collection.

XVI


Page 12:
AMRITA

secret reserved due to its danger in the hands of the inexpe-
rienced. He noted in his diary that “I think knowledge of
the [X° has, upset Frater E.N.L.16 It is too much like-a
short cut, & is a very dangerous practice indeed for one
untrained by long years of ceremonial. My success, &
immunity, may well be due to the fact that I did not know
it till after 14 years’ hard work.”!7 As an Agape Lodge
initiate phrased it, the knowledge of the Amrita is a crown
of thorns to the unwary and the unprepared. Such admo-
nitions are likely to be ignored by those seeking power
without responsibility. Even so, Crowley believed that
the secret had automatic safeguards against abuse.

The texts here published were edited from a number of
manuscripts and typescripts, the differences between them
being largely confined to small changes in wording and
punctuation; in particular I wish to thank the Harry Ran-
som Humanities Research Center at the University of
Texas at Austin for their assistance. As interesting parallels
I have added a draft advertisement for “IT,” Crowley’s
perfume of attraction, and an essay I have entitled “On
Food,” written in 1943 at the request of Regina Kahl, an
Agape Lodge member and Priestess in the Gnostic Mass,
which suggests the importance of nutrition in the magical
regimen and the occult doctrines implicit in it.

The frontispiece, “De Alchymistis,” by J. Daniel
Gunther is after a painting by Crowley in a MS of Agape.
R. Williams generously lent his technical expertise to the
design and production. Helen Parsons Smith, also an
Agape Lodge member and Priestess in the Gnostic Mass,
had the vision and the determination to see this book
published.

The brevity of Amrita belies its importance.

ManrtTIN P. STARR

16 AHIH NChSh LOMI, Eheieh Nechesh Le-A’ami (Heb.) was the
Probationer motto of Israel Regardic (1907-1985).
17 Crowley, diary, July 9, 1930, Yorke Collection.

XVII

A.M.R.I.T.A.

This method of restoring youth and energy has been the
principal secret of the O.T.O. (Order of Oriental Temp-
lars) for many years.

It has been brought into line jwith modern scientific
thought and practice by the researches of the present
Grand Master of the Order [Aleister Crowley].

It does not depend upon drugs, injections, operations,
or other violent interference with the Order of Nature, but
renews the tissues by the administration of the Amrita, or
Elixir of Immortality itself.

But before this can be done, the body must be thor-
oughly cleansed of its accumulated poisons and the elas-
ticity of its mechanical structure restored, a process which
requires from three to seven months, according to the
original condition of the patient, and his assiduity in fol-
lowing out the prescribed course.

The treatment can be carried out without interference
with the patient’s mode of life, occupying as a rule only
one to two hours daily.

The result is a real, not merely an apparent, reduction of
the patient’s age from five to fifteen years. The benefit is a
definite gain; and as years pass, and the natural processes
of ageing continue, the final treatment can be applied
without the long preliminary purifications; that is, within
a single month. It may be advisable, as a general rule, to
take this every five years.

The O.T.O. has decided to accept a few selected per-
sons from without its own membership; applications
should be addressed to BM/JPKH, London, w.c.1. The
fees amount to One Hundred Guineas monthly, inclusive.


Page 13:
The Elixir of Life: Our Magical
Medicine
A Lecture delivered before the National Laboratory
of Psychical Research

The title of my address tonight may well have caused
surprise in some quarters. Magick seems to interest a great
many people, and rejuvenation a great many others; but
the two classes rarely overlap. It is part of my purpose this
evening, however, to show that this is founded upon a
misconception of the nature of both subjects. In reality,
they almost coincide. Is it not written “They that sow to
the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting?”

I think I had better begin by giving you a glimpse of the
secret initiated tradition of magick with regard to the doc-
trine of rejuvenation. The essential point to grasp is that,
while we do not by any means regard the universe as an
illusion in a sense which that word is understood by cer-
tain schools of Hindus, we hold that there exists a certain
hierarchy of reality, the most spiritual rank in which is the
truest perfection and reality. That form of matter which is
directly perceptible by the senses, while not wholly unre-
al, is regarded, if I may use the expression, as the excre-
ment of the living truth of a thing. It may be regarded in
another light as circumstantial evidence of reality.

Perhaps I may make myself clearer by quoting the very
practical case of a murder trial. The prisoner is charged
with taking away the life of a fellow-creature, feloniously,
wilfully, and of his malice aforethought. It is his spiritual
condition, his motive, which constitutes the crime of mur-
der, and the actual facts of the case are only important so
far as they go to create an irrefragable presumption of his
state of mind.

Now the essence of magick is the working upon phe-
nomena by spiritual forms of energy. We use the laws of

3


Page 14:
AMRITA

nature, and the materials at our disposal, in much the same
way as a painter uses the laws of light and his colors and
canvases to convey his idea of ultimate truth to others, and
by enlightening them in this way to obtain the desired
impression. It is merely a question of practice and tech-
nique to overcome the inertia of our materials to bring
order from chaos, and we have to work within the natural
limits of things if we are to obtain what we want. The
magician does not try to eat tintacks. His art in this matter
consists in taking substances naturally nutritious; and pre-
paring them in such a way as will best satisfy his palate and
his digestion.

It should therefore not occasion any surprise, least of all
to the distinguished audience which I have the honor of
addressing this evening, if I insist that the problem of
rejuvenation can only be profitably attacked from the
magical salient. It is, of course, perfectly true that we can
bring about desired changes by manipulation of matter on
its own plane, but from the point of view of the magician
this is a clumsy and empirical method, and furthermore is
liable to prove dangerous; because such operations are, in
the nature of things, little better than blind guesses. To be
really successful, we must study the essential qualities both
of our means and of our object. We must stand outside and
above them if we are to deal with them effectively, and
this means the use of magical methods. After all, one of
the factors in our problem is physical life itself, which can
hardly be confused with the combinations of matter which
give rise to it, or (at least) are commonly associated with
its manifestations.

Such, briefly, are the outlines of the theory on which
magicians have worked since the beginning of history.

We may now take a very cursory glance at the magical
tradition itself insofar as it bears upon this problem of
rejuvenation. One need not refer seriously to people like
King Brahmadatta, who reigned an hundred and twenty

4

.
1
'

The Elixir of Life: Our Magical Medicine

thousand years in Benares. The enormous bulk of Oriental
figures can be dismissed as symbolic, and everyone who
has travelled in the East and enquired how far it is to the
nearest village, will be very painfully reminded of the local
lack of precision. But in the Book of Genesis we get (in the
pre-diluvian genealogy) very precise figures, and, what-
ever the explanation may be, the ordinary one which ap-
plies to so many Biblical statements, the moral interpreta-
tion of a number according to the words which it
represents, does not apply. I see no particular reason to
disbelieve wholesale the general tradition of great longevi-
ty. It seems to be quite reasonable to admit that in primi-
tive times the dangers of life were very much less than
they are now. The world was emptier, life was simpler,
the number of diseases was very much less. There were no
regular doctors.

I cannot say that I attach any very great importance to
any argument drawn from this source. The utmost that
one can say is that life need not necessarily be anything like
as short as the average today. Within our own generation
the statistics of insurance companies show that quite slight
modifications in the circumstances of a people can make
very noticeable differences in the average duration of life.

To continue this historical animadversion, there is
really, as far as I know, nothing in the Bible which indi-
cates clearly the existence of any secret traditional method
of prolonging life. Long life is always regarded as a bless-
ing, but the only method of obtaining it seems to have
been piety, and it is perhaps fortunate that we are not
confined to this somewhat vague method, as piety is dead
today.

Nor have my researches carried me far enough to enable
me to tell you, with any authority, of what folk lore to
search for the first indication of that quest of the Elixir of
Life which appears so spontaneously with the alchemists;
but I feel inclined to surmise that it must have existed in


Page 15:
AMRITA

secret for a long period, since it comes into notice contem-
poraneously with the general Renaissance. There may per-
haps have been some mystery concealed beneath the fables
of the Greek mythology, where immortality, usually un-
der restricted conditions, is attained by mortals; generally
as a result of pleasing the gods, or of driving a hard bar-
gain with them. In any case, the Elixir of Life became
known as one of the three principal pre-occupations of
alchemy, and here we come at once upon a very interest-
ing and suggestive fact. Even today, in spite of research, it
is not openly known what was the real theory of the alche-
mist. It seems to us absurd that a man who was trying to
make gold from baser metals should have abused all his
colleagues on the grounds that they were heretics or of bad
moral character. But that is no longer so curious if one
assumes (with one school) that the alchemists were really
mystics in many cases, and were not dealing with ordinary
chemistry at all, which is absurd, because their works do
follow them; or with the school to which I myself adhere,
the school which holds and works with the theory which I
outlined in the beginning of these remarks, that matter is
nothing but a sensible symbol of spiritual causes of phe-
nomena. In other words, the alchemist dealt magically
with Matter.

At this point we may reach out a hand to the East and
dwell for a moment upon the general theory of Prana.
Prana is usually translated “force.” Perhaps energy would
be a better term. We cannot say exactly what it is, but it is
that which distinguishes live protoplasm from dead pro-
toplasm. It is that by virtue of which things live and move
and have their being. It is a form of energy by whose
adroit manipulation one can affect the outward appear-
ances, that is to say the physical phenomena which are its
reflection in the grossest world of illusion, that is to say,
the world we know.

Cand

The Elixir of Life: Our Magical Medicine

To give a practical example. If a man is ill, they diag-
nose that the prana in his body is in some way out of
order, and they attempt to cure him by teaching him to
control his prana by means of various exercises, prin-
cipally of breathing, for they claim that the principal vehi-
cle of prana is the breath.

In the light of modern physiology, these theories do not
sound as absurd as they would have done to our grand-
fathers. The whole tendency of physics and its soul, math-
ematics, in the last thirty years or more, has been to move
away from the hard-headed and heavy-footed materialism
of the Victorian age. The grossest qualities of any sub-
stance, not less than the most subtle, are nowadays con-
ceived as being various modes of its motion. All the ulti-
mate terms employed by modern thinkers to attempt to
define the real nature of a thing have become infinitely
subtle in conception, appreciable only by the noblest intel-
ligences; and (even so) they are found to be definable, so
much so that certain modern writers have been able to”
form a daisy-chain in which no link exists except in rela-
tion to the others. This fundamental revolution in our
whole habit of thought has become familiar to all of us:
even the merest readers of newspapers in little paragraphs
know that an element is not, as was supposed fifty years
ago, an ultimate substance sui generis. Perhaps the best way
to picture an element is as an especial kind of dance
rhythm. If then this be so in so gross a matter as chemis-
try, why should it not be even easier to apply these princi-
ples to physiology? The life of the body is in the individual
cell, and it is on the harmony and interplay and on the
well-being of these cells, that health depends and life itself.
We come, therefore, quite quickly and quietly to the heart
of the problem. We grow old because our cells fail to keep
up with the rhythm of the dance of life. But there is noth-
ing the matter with the cells themselves. During the first
years of life they dance so well that their administrator

7


Page 16:
AMRITA

increases constantly in mental and bodily stature. It is
known also that the principal cause of cellular degenera-
tion is failure to get rid of waste tissue. The cells are
clogged; they are no longer as elastic as they were. A great
many modern methods of rejuvenation lay special stress
upon attempts to cleanse the body. You may be interested
especially in one which has always been held very secret.
Tonight is probably the first time that it has ever been
mentioned at all except under vows of the greatest se-
crecy. I refer to the method of cleansing by the four ele-
ments. The waste products of the body are attacked one
by one in a carefully graduated series of treatments; and,
without any other assistance, a body which is not too
hopelessly down the hill, is able to pick up the rhythm of
youth and activity. As a matter of fact, this is merely a
scientific development of what is done by all of us in
empirical ways with our holidays by the sea, and our sun-
bathing, our cures in various Spas, our mud baths, our
radio treatments, and the like. The difference is that the
cleansing by the four elements does not leave any corner
unvisited.

I am inclined to think that were it practically possible to
live from the beginning in perfectly hygienic conditions,
that there would be no need for any Elixir of Life, but
unfortunately we are all so situated that circumstances are
constantly forcing us into the most scandalous neglect of
every precaution about health. To renew our strength as
the eagle’s, we are therefore compelled to go back to the
Elixir of Life, and I should like to mention to you one or
two cases where this subject has been dealt with in fiction.

You all remember that in Lytton’s Zanoni, the adept
Mejnour had gone on cheerfully living and being rude to
people for many centuries; but the author is deplorably
vague about what Mejnour did to produce this effect, and
no one need wonder that his creator became a strikingly
successful politician.

The Elixir of Life: Our Magical Medicine

Then we have the very famous case of Althotas in
Dumas’ Memoirs of a Physician; and there again the only
ingredient which is specified with any precision is that at
the last moment the Elixir is to be completed with the
three last drops of blood drawn from the body of a virgin.
This, of course, links up with the tradition of ritual mur-
der and the like, and I have no intention of going further
into that widely talked of and little known subject tonight.
In any case there is no attempt at a scientific explanation of
the theory.

Far otherwise is the case of Claude Farrére in La Maison
des Hommes Vivants. Claude Farrére is a very good friend
of mine with whom I have spent many very pleasant eve-
nings, though not entirely I am glad to say, upon pure
research. But he told me much of his life in the East, of the
wisdom he learned from Chinese philosophers. As I am
personally convinced that no one can know anything at all
until he has harmonized, I may even say identified, all
existing theories of the Universe, I believe that what he
puts forward in this book is worthy of the most serious
attention. In case anyone here has not read it, I will just
outline the essential part of the story.

A French officer, lost in a fog, encounters a very vig-
orous man, white-bearded, who proves to be some eighty
years of age. He gives the officer shelter and introduces
him to his father and grandfather, all equally alert and
vigorous. The grandfather explains that he learned the
secret of rejuvenation from the famous Comte de St. Ger-
main, who was himself reputed to have lived for a number
of centuries. The one important factor in his account of St.
Germain is that the cause of death was really that he had
been too ambitious, that he had tried to “fix” himself at
the age of forty, or thereabouts, instead of later years. The
idea being that at forty one lives a life which is liable to
serious shocks so grave that physiology cannot be relied
upon always to repair the damage. The old gentleman

9


Page 17:
AMRITA

took warning by this disaster, made his experiment and
decided to stay in the neighborhood of eighty, retaining
the very fullest use of his faculties in every manner.

Now, what was the method employed by these worthy
persons? They had a curious piece of apparatus, something
in the nature of an enormous lens, which they put up in
the middle of a large room with an armchair on each side
of it. They applied some unspecified source of energy
which transferred, through the lens, the living cells of the
person in one chair to the person in the other, with the
evident result that the giver is completely exhausted, and
requires some period of recuperation before he (or she) is
again fit to communicate more life. We are reminded at
once, of course, not only of the old stories of vampirism,
but of modern methods of transfusion of blood, and also
of the methods of Dr. Voronoff. Now in this story it is
not expressed in so many words, but it is subtly implied
throughout, that although the actual method of rejuvena-
tion is, prima facie, material, a great deal of psychic energy
is required to make it effective.

In the three methods which I have mentioned the same
thing is curiously true. Vampirism is a definitely magical
art. In the transfusion of blood there must be a peculiar
sympathy between the giver and the receiver. And, the
operations of Dr. Voronoff might, I think, be very much
more effective if he had studied what Paracelsus and
Baptista Porta called Sympathy, as well as the general
theory of prana.

These examples I have produced really more as “hor-
rible examples,” than as monuments of human wisdom.
To the initiate such things only indicate how useless is all
human wisdom unenlightened by the Spirit of Truth. The
initiate constantly reads of the latest great discovery in
science, and is reminded of what they taught him in the
secret conclaves of the Adepts at the very outset of his
studies. This is no less true of methods of rejuvenation

10

The Elixir of Life: Our Magical Medicine

than it is of the theory of relativity. You will find space
described as “finite yet boundless” in the poem of a boy of
twenty-five, published in the year 1901. All Einstein in
one phrase!

The Adepts have always known how to prolong life
and, what is infinitely more important, the activity and
enjoyment of life. As they happen to be men of sense they
have refrained from publishing such dangerous informa-
tion to the world. They have refrained from applying it
even to themselves unless some serious cosmic purpose is
to be served by doing so in any set case. In the ordinary
way we are liable to say, “Let us not interfere with natural
processes, let us die when the time comes and start afresh!”

In fact I think I should not have chosen this subject at all
for discussion tonight but for the fact that it is very much
in the minds of the peoples of the world at the present
moment. It is particularly stupid that it should be so be-
cause what the world wants is a really selective disease
which would wipe out one-third of the population of the
earth, sparing only those who were either strong enough
to resist or intelligent enough to evade it. For it would
certainly be most deplorable if we should reach, in reality,
a state like to that described by Jonathan Swift in his ac-
count of the Struldbruggs.

We really cannot do with any more “statesmen” than
we have at present. There are no doubt cases where the
prolongation of active life might enable the completion of
an important research. No doubt any of you will be able to
think of other cases suitable for the process; especially
your own.

Iam compelled by the terms of my oath to refrain from
any public exposition of the theory and practice of re-
juvenation. I may even get a rap or two over the knuckles
for the hints I have already given, but I can at least give my
personal testimony to the fact that this process is not
chimerical, but a living reality of science.

im


Page 18:
AMRITA

I will tell you of one or two cases that I have seen. The
first is that of a man of forty years of age. He was resident
in New York, and _ prepared—very hastily and
ignorantly—the Elixir from the doubtless imperfect data
at his disposal. He took a dose. Nothing came of it, as in
the case of the boy who prayed for a bicycle. So, he took
another dose, with no result. He took a third dose, and it
merely made him angry. He began to want to prove that it
was useless, and he took four more doses. Then, at this
moment he went up to live in a cottage which borders a
lake in New Hampshire. He purchased a sailing canoe and
a little axe with which to chop wood so that he could cook
his suppers, and to remind him of George Washington.
Then, the “stuff? began to work in the most violent
manner.

He lost the whole of his intellectual interest, he became
like a rather stupid boy of his teens, and began to cut down
trees like a madman; he put in fifteen hours a day at this.
On one occasion he wanted to make a wharf for his canoe,
so he cut down an appropriate tree and prepared a section
twenty-two feet long, the trunk being so big that he could
not put his arms nearly round it even at the smaller end.
He had no tools, and yet worked that log down through
the other trees to the water’s edge. The feat became locally
notorious. People came from all sides to witness this fan-
tastic burst of energy which lasted a couple of months or
so. It then became spiritualized, and he accomplished
within six weeks more work than would be expected of
anyone in as many months. Then a violent reaction set in,
and he was more or less afflicted with lassitude for nearly
half a year. Such annoyance may be caused to those who
follow ignorance and indiscretion. But this man learned
through his mistakes. When he came to try the experiment
again, some six years later, he took the proper precautions
and prepared the Elixir intelligently and with great care.
He took measured doses, with the proper precautions, and

12

The Elixir of Life: Our Magical Medicine

in good conditions. This experiment was a complete suc-
cess. Instead of forty-seven, one would have taken him to
be at the most a man of thirty-five years, and he retained
all his intellectual interests and abilities. In fact they were
very greatly enhanced, as well as his essential physical
well-being. This state was persisting indefinitely when it
was cut short by a series of tragic occurrences of a purely
external character. Even so the result of his operation is
still, in spite of very adverse circumstances, noticeable
today.

The other case with which I propose to detain your
attention for a moment is that of a woman just under forty
years, if | remember correctly. She was constitutionally
sound, but suffering from complete nervous exhaustion
and debility. In this case two doses of the Elixir not only
restored her to more than her normal health and strength,
but took a good ten years off her apparent age.

These are no doubt spectacular results, and perhaps one
may admit that the circumstances were about as favorable
for success as they could have been. On the other hand the
preparer and administrator of the medicine, in both cases,
had not anything like the experience that he should have
had—before attempting the project. I have no doubt my-
self that this practice and further experiment would enable
us to perfect this method of magical rejuvenation within a
very short time. In particular I am convinced that the key
to progress depends upon emphasizing this word “magi-
cal.” Iam sure that the spiritual conditions of our existence
must be made perfect before life itself will be really worth
living.

As I said at the beginning this evening, “They that sow
to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, but they that
sow to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.”


Page 19:
The Elixir of Life (1)

Although I was admitted to the thirty-third and last degree
of Freemasonry so long ago as 1900, it was not until the
Summer of 1912 that my suspicion was confirmed. I speak
of my belief that behind the frivolity and convivialities of
our greatest institution lay in truth a secret ineffable and
miraculous, potent to control the forces of Nature, and
not only to make men brethren, but to make them divine.
But at the time I speak of a man came to me, a man of
those mysterious masters of Esoteric Freemasonry who
are alike its Eyes and its brains, and who exist in its
midst—unknown, often, even to its acknowledged chiefs.
This man had been watching my occult career for some
years, and deemed me now worthy to partake in the
Greater Mysteries.

With these he proceeded to acquaint me, and my life has
since then been devoted principally to their study and
practice.

I say practice, as no mere intellectual attainment is at
issue. On the contrary, it would be simple for me to com-
municate the knowledge of the principal secret in three
words, if I were not bound alike by my oath and my
natural good sense. It is the practical application of the
secret that demands labor, intelligence, and—something
more!

In my own case, two and a half years of research along
these lines have not sufficed to make me perfect, only to
make me ready to bet about three to one that in any given
operation I shall succeed.

In the Manifesto of the most secret Order of which my
master is the head, is written:

15



Page 20:
AMRITA

“In its (the Order’s) bosom repose the Great Mysteries;
its brain has resolved all the problems of philosophy and of
life.

“Tt possesses the secret of the Stone of the Wise, of the
Elixir of Immortality, and of the Universal Medicine.

“Moreover, it possesses a secret capable of realizing the
world-old dream of the Brotherhood of Man.”

Just at this juncture its adepts are busy on the last work
above mentioned. They mean to take a hand in the recon-
struction of the Old World, and make another such catas-
trophe such as the present war impossible. At the same
time, they welcome the war as having given them their
opportunity.

But just now it is my purpose to speak rather of the
Elixir of Life.

In Nature there is nothing a priori impossible, unless it
be a contradiction in terms. There is nothing impossible,
then, in the idea of prolonging life, and youth. Already
mere hygiene has done a very great deal in the course of a
generation, and the insurance companies have made for-
tunes in consequence. Let us therefore examine closely the
nature of the problem. Consider the human body, why it
decays. Each cell in that body is theoretically immortal in
the biological sense. It can reproduce itself without loss.
The very Laws of the Conservation of Matter and of Ener-
gy show that this must be so. All change in the Universe is
compensated by other change.

Huxley showed that the simpler organisms are in fact
immortal. They grow, reproduce themselves by division,
grow again, divide again, and so on through the ages,
unless some accident interferes.

Now the much more complex organism, man, may, for
all we know be similarly immune to time. At least we
know this, that man’s career is marked by unfortunate
mischances, and that the sum of these is the common cause
of death. Very few die of old age, pure and simple. Titian

16

The Elixir of Life (I)

was painting vigorously at the age of ninety-nine, and it
took an epidemic of cholera to kill him.

It might easily be that a man sheltered from all accident
might live to an age now supposed beyond attainment.
But even as things are, we have several cases of people
who have reached one hundred and fifty years.

However, let us ask what it is that produces senility. No
major accidents, such as typhus fever, are required. It is
the slow degeneration by poisoning, minute unperceived
poisoning, that works the mischief. It is excesses long
prepared in the system such as Bright’s, diabetes, gout,
rheumatism, arteriosclerosis that count. Therefore I shall
ask the reader to regard every deposit of poison in the
system as an accident, one of those minor accidents whose
sum is death.

This is not new; indeed, Metchnikoff and others have
proposed to obtain immortality by perfecting the excre-
tory system. They believe—and I partly without
contradiction—that if only pure nourishment entered the
body, it would renew itself daily in perfection, instead of
in that slight imperfection which makes its story a slow
but certain tragedy.

There are thus two problems to be solved; (1) to remove
from the body every substance that tends to injure it; and
(2) to nourish the body with a substance so pure, so quin-
tessentially vital, that it can flood the man with life itself,
at the same time placing no strain upon the organs.

This substance is known. Of it the wise men of old have
written in many symbols. Hermes Trismegistus on his
Emerald Tablet engraved of it, “The Sun is its Father; the
Moon its Mother; it is born of the wind and the earth is its
nurse.” Everybody has part of it; nobody has all of it. It
dies at its birth and it lives at its death. Eliphaz Levi called
it “Magnetized Electricity.” In the Bible it is asked con-
cerning it, “What is sweeter than honey, and what is
stronger than a lion?” It is made by dissolving sulphur in

17


Page 21:
AMRITA

salt. It is made of the dew upon a rose, or of the pearl in an
oyster.

All these riddles have only one answer, and he is the
wiscst man on earth who can best solve them.

For this substance is not only the strongest thing on
carth, but the most sensitive; it is master of humanity, and
yet perfectly obedient to the will of man. Say to it, “Bring
money,” and it obeys; bid it cure the sick, and straighta-
way they are cured. I believe there is no event within the
fence of possibility that cannot be brought about by its
use.

So great are the potentialities of this substance that the
knowledge of it is only entrusted to high initiates, and
then after years of service to the Order. For one thing, so
rare and precious is this substance that if its value were
known this race of lunatics of which we are ornaments
would instantly set to work killing each other in order to
obtain it. It is not only the Elixir of Life but of Death!

The particular work of rejuvenation is a long and diffi-
cult process, and I have never had leisure to undertake it.
Yet as a mere side issue of other experiments I have found
my vitality increased, my health improved, and my ap-
pearance altogether changed as the accompanying photo-
graphs will show. I am proposing shortly to undertake a
retirement in company with another initiate, to carry out
the full process, and ascertain the limits of its power. I do
not imagine that the clock can be put back beyond the
critical point of equilibrium with advantage, that adoles-
cence can replace maturity. I am sure that so far as the
body is uninjured, it can be made a perfect medium for the
full current of life and vigor, and that not only can decay
be arrested, but the very seeds thereof sterilized.

It is forbidden now as it has always been to disclose the
operations or even to call public attention to its results.
Only to interest and encourage those who may be worthy
of a full measure of knowledge is it permitted to exhibit a

1s

The Elixir of Life (I)

lesser matter. We possess a certain substance which has the
property of raising a man, however exhausted, to his
highest activity for a whole night. In the morning he is as
fresh as if he had a full sleep. Only on the succeeding
evening he should retire early, and sleep long, as the action
of the substance is only temporary, and it is unwise to
renew its application unless in case of urgency.

This I am prepared to demonstrate. I do not guarantee
instant success in all cases, for this substance is subtle by its
action, and the dose suited to any man must be determined
by experiment. In my experience I have known it vary
from 50 to 450 drops, and I am quite unable to judge what
any given person needs. The greatest tolerance in its action
I ever saw was in the case of a girl of twenty.

However, two or three experiments are usually enough,
and from that time one has the best “emergency ration”
ever discovered.

19


Page 22:
The Elixir of Life (II)

The conditions of life are that the organism should be able
to adjust itself continually to its environment. Any indi-
vidual, to do this for long, needs either very great intelli-
gence or very great luck. His chief physical asset is elas-
ticity, the powers of compensation and recuperation. Our
bodies are some 75% pure water; we are a mere sponge;
our strength arises from the great mechanical “ingenuity”
of our structure. We are not “solid bodies” like the most
inanimate things. This water, by kidneys, lungs, and skin,
constantly cleanses us, and carries off most’ of our waste
and noxious matter. Block one of these conduits, death
follows very rapidly. However, this drainage systems is
not quite perfect; our pipes “fur” like a kettle. Disease and
accident apart, we die of arteriosclerosis caused by the
gradual deposit of insoluble salts which harden the ar-
teries, and destroy the elasticity which enables them to
adjust themselves to new conditions. In fact, we “perish”
like india rubber. Old age is simply a solidification of the
tissues, all of which become hard, dry and brittle.

As in philosophy, change is life, stagnation death; we
should not fear a brisk metabolism. Why should the pro-
cess which we called growth only a few years ago become
degeneration? For the same reason that a well-kept, well-
oiled engine works more easily with age, while a rusty one
wrecks itself. Exercise helps us to sluice our sewers, but
we must flush them well with water to dissolve mineral
waste. We must avoid the ingestion of food likely to leave
insoluble deposits.

But there is another cause of decay, cause also in part of
this poisoning. Our organs would repair themselves per-

ai


Page 23:
AMRITA

fectly, if they were given sufficient rest. In their haste,
they absorb the first material to hand, be it good or bad.
Also, we call on them to work before they are fully rested,
and so we wear them gradually out. Exercise is necessary
to keep us clean; but our rest must be perfect restoration
also. We can give the muscles this benefit by Asana, and
also thereby reduce to a minimum the work of the heart
and the lungs. We can give our digestion rest by eating
only at noon and sunset, thus allowing them a clear twelve
hours of the twenty-four. Pranayama is the ideal exercise,
as it promotes metabolism to the utmost with a minimum
of fatigue, and can be combined with Asana.

The Hindus, to whom we owe these practices, realize
also that the solidity of food is an objection. They try to
live on the prana (subtle energy) contained in it. For in-
stance, they teach people to reject their food before it has
passed out of the stomach. In the West we have sought
rather to discover concentration of food, and pre-digested
preparations of it, with the minimum of substance liable to
form waste, insoluble or poisonous products. We thus
endeavor to diminish the work necessary to assimilation as
well as to avoid dirt and disorder in our Temple. We even
eliminate on occasion the whole alimentary canal, and feed
our patients by direct injection into the blood, or by ab-
sorption of nutriment in some convenient mucous
membrane.

But mankind, in temperate climes, does not ask merely
to exist; it demands joy, and joy, physiologically speak-
ing, consists in the expenditure of surplus energy. Men
living in the Tropics need very little food, since all we
require beyond the repair of tissue and the supply of me-
chanical force, is the heat required to keep our bodies at
37° C as above the temperature of the air. If that already be
27° or so, we need but half of that necessary if it be 17°, or
one-third if it be 7°. Yet men in the Tropics are not more
energetic than our Norsemen and Scots. Those like “dolce

eh)

The Elixir of Life (II)

far niente” repose as these take pleasure in activity. Even
their phantasies attest this, the one inventing Nirvana as
the other Valhalla.

We admire the frolics of a young horse turned out to
grass; we cultivate rough games, wild sports, and athlet-
ics. The Struldbrugg of Swift is, perhaps, to us, of all his
creations the most horrible. The immortality we ask is
neither idleness nor stagnation; we want infinite youth to
squander, just as we ask a bottomless purse, not to hoard,
but to spend. We cannot rest, as the tropical people cannot
work properly and efficiently. By our theory, they should
live longer than we do; but the same high temperatures
that favors them befriends their enemies, bacteria; and
they lack our science of health.

Now, all the means that we take to prolong life, such as
I have outlined above, have so far failed to supply this
superfluity of energy which we really desire. People with
diets and breathing exercises and the like are usually walk-
ing sepulchres, some of them whited! The animal who
thinks about his health is already sick. Absence of noise
and friction is the witness of free mechanical function. Fear
naturally creates disease, for the mind begins to explore,
and so to interfere with, the unconscious rhythm of the
body, as the Edinburgh Review killed John Keats.

The man with the best chance of prolonged youth is he
who eats and drinks heartily, not caring what, who does
things vigorously in the open air, with the minimum of
common-sense precautions, and who keeps his mind at
the same time thoroughly active, free from worry, and his
heart high. He has come, with William Blake, to the Pal-
ace of Wisdom by the road of Excess. He is on friendly
terms with Nature, and though he does not fear her, he
heeds her, and does not provoke her. “It is better,” says
he, “to wear out than to rust out.” True, but is there need
to wear out? He tires himself improperly, and he digs his
own grave with his own teeth.

Ras)


Page 24:
AMRITA

It is this surplus of good food, this codicil to our Will to
Life, that makes us, like the Englishman on the fine day,
want to go out and kill something. And so Death pays us
in so much Uric Acid at his Human Savings-Bank.

There are only two solutions possible, the invention of
either a solvent more perfect than water, or a superfood.
The first alternative is theoretically none too probable. As
to the second, if food were merely a chemical and mechan-
ical agent in us, the problem would be one of diet. But
there is some reason to believe that food contains a sub-
stance yet unanalyzed and unweighed which is of the na-
ture of pure Energy. Live foods, like oysters, stimulate
inexplicably; foods long stored lose their nutritive value,
though the chemist and the physicist can detect no change.
We need no psychical research, but only common sense
and common experience, to tell us that there is a difference
between a live thing and a dead one beyond the detective
powers of the laboratories of Mid-Victorian arrogance and
dogmatism.

A copper wire changes not in color, weight, or chemical
composition when a current of electricity passes through
it; must we deny the existence of that force whose nature is
still perfectly mysterious despite our knowledge of its
properties, our measurements, and our control of it? Why
then deny a Life-bearing force? Ostensibly because “there
is no evidence of it”; but mainly because the hypothesis
happened to be packed with the theological parcel of rub-
bish. But we have this indirect evidence of it, that, unless
we assume something of the sort, we have nothing to span
the gap between two well-ascertained groups of facts, fa-
miliar to all, namely, the facts of “matter” and the facts of
“mind.”

To our copper wire, again! Electricity is matter of a
subtle and tenuous sort, in a peculiar state of motion; so is
my hypothetical Life-bearing force. The charged copper
wire does not weary or wear out, why should the human

24

The Elixir of Life (II)

body do so, if only we could feed it with pure Life? Nature
everywhere is prolific of live things, animal and vegetable.
(Pray note that these things, and only these things, avail to
feed us.) What a wealth of “spiritual” force is in an acorn!
What history, its beginning veiled beyond all search! What
potentiality of future life of growth, of multiplication be-
yond all conjecture! Like us, it has the power of Life; it can
take live things and dead things into its own substance,
bidding them, for its own purposes, to live again, trans-
figured! There’s far more energy in the acorn than in
radium—at which fools gaped so wide in wonder. Far
more, and far higher; radium only degenerates and dissi-
pates; the acorn lives!

But all that energy is latent and potential; the acorn must
be fed, like the fire that it is. (For every growth is a chemi-
cal change, a kind of combustion, element married to ele-
ment with violence, with change of state, with heat, light,
pleasure, pain, and its by-products. Growth crowns itself
with bloom or scent, with flame or color, with wisdom,
conscious or unconscious. The acorn cannot hoard its
wealth of experience, use its credit of possibility, except
by taking earth, air, and water into partnership, and in-
voking on the venture the benediction of the Sun. If we
destroy the fragile walls of its huge Library of Wisdom,
we do not otherwise than did the Saracen at Alexandria.
The ages draw black hoods over their mighty foreheads;
they cover their inscrutable eyes; they breathe no more
upon us; their voice is Silence, Mystery, Oblivion, and we
are left orphans, exposed like Oedipus, the toys of unintel-
ligible oracles, the children of a chance whose wheel the
cheating croupier, Malice, has loaded with a curse. Where
is the treasured wisdom of that dead world? Where is the
Sphinx that hid in our crushed acorn? It was; it is not,
Love itself, no more intangible, more fugitive, more tragic
or more heedless. Its Fate? The oracles sneer; the hiero-
glyphs are indecipherable, the black lamb is found without

25


Page 25:
AMRITA

a heart, and we must make our pilgrimage perforce to the
altar of the Unknown God. All we can say is: It is not.
Nay, but it was; and so, in some strange form, must be,
else were all science and all mathematics falsehood and
mockery.

But, as long since we learned, first to distinguish rubbed
from unrubbed amber, next to measure, last to control,
though never yet to understand the nature of the force that
made that distinction; so we can tell the living from the
dead, can even measure life roughly, by taking heed of the
external shews and proofs; so we shall come to control it,
perhaps—nay, surely—to create it.

We cannot yet direct the forces of the acorn, save within
the narrowest limits; we can stop, thwart, or foster, even
distort its growth; but we cannot lure it so far from its
path as to grow elms from it. But that is due to the definite
bent and scope of the peculiar structure of the physical
basis of that Life force which must be one, even as elec-
tricity is one.

We shall be able to gather, if not to create, this Life; to
transmute it into other forms of force, as now we trans-
mute heat to light. We shall be able to store it, to harness
it, to guide it to absorb its energy in ourselves directly,
without resorting to our present gross, inefficient,
cumbrous, and dangerous means of abstracting it from its
ores (if one may say so) mechanically, blindly, em-
pirically, and with such toil and strife. Our journey—by
such means of transit—is necessary and hateful; our travel-
ling companions our diseases, and the host to ease us at the
end of the short, the weary way, is Death.

As yet, we cannot drink at the source of Life, keep
youth perpetual as we can now keep light—strange real-
ization of the Rosicrucian’s death, or, maybe, discovery of
his secret!

But we have found the superfood. We know a vehicle of
which a few grains can house cnough pure Life to fill a

20

The Elixir of Life (II)

man not only with nourishment, but with Energy almost
superhuman, and parallel, intelligence incredibly sun-
bright for four-and-twenty hours. That substance is the-
oretically easy, but practically hard, to obtain. In England
and America it would be impossible to procure any quan-
tity, even of the raw material, at least in strength and
purity, much less to prepare it.

We know how to charge this substance with the Life-
force. The process is at present laborious and expensive;
great skill is required, and much precaution, for errors in
its preparation are hard to detect, and may result in hide-
ous mischief.

It is now six years since we gained our knowledge; they
have been crowded with experiment; we are arrived at the
practical stage. We cannot understand the true Nature of
this force; we cannot measure it; we cannot create it, or
obtain it synthetically.

But we can purify it and intensify it, we can, within
wide limits, determine at will the quantity and scope of its
action; we can postpone death, increase energy or prolong

youth; and we are justified in saying that we possess the
Elixir of Life.

II

In the first part of this paper we have compared the
Elixir to a body highly charged with spiritual and vital
force. We are now to consider the technique of its admin-
istration. It is obvious that precautions are necessary. We
must be on our guard lest, in the scriptural phrase, the new
wine burst the bottles. A month in the Alps, which would
invigorate a healthy youth, would simply kill a person
with a weak heart. The more powerful the reagent, the
greater the danger of making a mistake in prescribing it.
This Elixir is the most powerful of all known substances.

Be it first said, that we, who have been entrusted with
the use of this tremendous power, feel responsible to hu-

My


Page 26:
AMRITA

manity, firstly to keep silence as to its true nature, lest
fools abuse it to their own destruction, or knaves, to work
mischief among their fellows; we shall not reveal the secret
of its composition or entrust its preparation to unskilled
ignorant people.

Moreover, we shall not extend its benefits to any person
no matter what advantage to ourselves might seem to
induce us; nor bestow it from any sentiment of affection or
pity. Before we endow any one with life, youth, or ener-
gy, beyond his constitutional rights, we must be well as-
sured that the forces gained from us will be used, not only
for harmless purpose, but for one tending to the welfare of
mankind in general, one way or another.

Even we, ourselves, refuse to employ it to renew our
own forces unless convinced by vigorous and impartial
examination that the Universal Good is to be served there-
by; or to prolong our own lives unless some circumstance
extraordinary assures our conscience of due justification;
for we who know best the Secret Ways of Nature acqui-
esce the most unquestioningly in Her mysterious course.

Assuming, however, that we have accepted a patient,
there arises the important question as to whether his state
warrants the application of the medicine. There is danger
of crushing a weak frame or of exciting to action the dor-
mant germs of disease. So long as such germs are in the
system, they are as hungry for the life and energy of our
Elixir as the rest of the body.

In order to avoid any risks of this sort, we therefore
prepare the patient for the Elixir by a long course of
Purification.

As we explained to some extent in the first part of this
paper, the apparently healthy individual is not so in any
absolute sense. Health is a relative term. A healthy man is
one in whom the forces which tend to permit the free
exercise of those functions which assist him to execute his
Will have for the time being practically complete domina-

28

;

The Elixir of Life (II)

tion of those forces which would tend to hinder him. At
the best of times, he is limited by the general capacity of
those functions and there is always a certain waste of ener-
gy involved in the fight with the noxious, inert, or excre-
mental substances which are in him. For example, much
of the energy developed by food is expended in getting rid
of the useless or poisonous elements with which the im-
purities of that food have burdened his system—even the
air that he breathes is not wholly vital, and his lungs ex-
crete poisonous products just as much as his skin, his
kidneys, or his colon. Moreover, as previously stated, the
work of elimination is never perfect. Little by little, insol-
uble salts of lime harden the arteries, while such poisons as
Uric Acid threaten the digestive functions, so that when
the accumulation is sufficient to interfere with the normal
course of metabolism, the man ceases to be healthy and
becomes diseased. But such a view is childishly crude. The
symptom of disease is not the disease itself. If you fill a
bath with water, it is absurd to cry out when the first drop
overflows—it is not that drop, but the millions of pre-
vious drops that have caused the symptom of overflow. A
man, therefore, is diseased from the beginning, from the
first useless particle of matter which has defied his system
to dislodge it. With regard to germs again, a scraping from
the throat of a healthy man in a big city will show a dozen
different bacilli of fatal maladies. He does not exhibit
symptoms of these maladies because the government of
his body, so to speak, is strong enough to suppress any
revolt before it becomes strong enough to menace him.

But if we are going to flood the whole system of a
human being with energy, we must see to it that this
vitality is not absorbed by lurking enemies—we must not
let hostile cavalry capture our baggage trains. There is
already one disease only too well known, which, with
malignant cunning scizes on all the nourishment of the
body and feeds itself at its expense. The so-called “New-

29


Page 27:
AMRITA

growths” have this power of playing ivy to the body’s
oak. They take its food, devour the tissues, raid its re-
motest parts, poison its wells. It is therefore a dangerous
thing to stimulate indiscriminately; massage, which inten-
sifies the life of the part treated, may create fatal disease if
rashly employed.

Before charging our wire with these fierce currents of
life, we must look closely to the integrity and the insula-
tion of the wire, and we must see that it is capable of
carrying the current. We cannot have it fuse.

The preparation of the patient for the acceptance of the
Elixir is therefore a task requiring the utmost intelligence
and assiduity. It is impossible to devise a course of treat-
ment to cover every case. The individual must be watched
and method varied as his state seems to indicate. But a
general idea of the character of the treatment may be given
in outline, and fundamental principles on which it is based
do not sensibly vary.

From the most remote times of antiquity, there have
been, as there still are, advocates of fasting as a means of
restoring health. Various schools have given almost
equally various explanations of the mechanism by which
the observed benefits are obtained, but the truth behind all
such theories is that the body, deprived of food from with-
out, is forced to supply its losses by using whatever is
within itself, taking first what it can best spare; accumula-
tions are thus got rid of and subsequently even less natural
sources of supply, such as its poisonous by-products. The
destruction of these is the real object of the treatment. But
try how it may, the body can only use organic com-
pounds, it cannot make haemoglobin out of calcium.

The method, then, is not without its dangers and de-
fects. Too great strain is often thrown on too many organs
at the same time. The body is purified, indeed, but in
many cases so enfeebled that in order to recuperate, it
cither repeats the excesses which originally tainted it, or it

30

The Elixir of Life (II)

is altogether unable to recover tone. It may adjust itself to
very easy running at low pressure, but it rarely regains its
capacity for producing the surplus energy that it needs if it
is to show robustness and activity.

The ancient methods of fasting were empirical. Modern
science has indicated a true reasoned course. In order to
meet the objections pointed out in the above paragraph,
we have taken advantage of the results of recent phys-
iological research. We know that there are three general
types of food: proteins, fats, and carbohydrates. All three,
in proportions varying with the individual and his en-
vironment, are necessary to his proper nourishment. Sup-
press any of these elements, and he starves as surely as if he
were deprived of all at once.

Our new manner of fasting depends on these facts. We
begin by suppressing one of the three elements; and the
body, determined to procure it, devours any waste prod-
ucts in itself which are of that nature. The strain of fasting
is divided by three. As soon as the body has had time to
make use of the last particle of that particular accumulation
of waste, the diet is changed, and one of the other elements
is chosen instead for temporary suppression.

After the third period then, the body has destroyed each
of the three armies attacking it, one after the other. It is
just as if a wise general, finding himself with two armies
against three, divided his opponents, and used his numeri-
cal superiority of two to one to crush each of them in turn.

This method of purification, by consuming the poison
and the rubbish which years of careless living have made
flesh heir to, might be called, to adopt the jargon of the
ancients, the purification by fire. But there are two other
active elements in their scheme of representing the uni-
verse: water and air, and the operation of these plays a
great part in our preparation. Food is the fuel of the fire of
the body; water is the solvent which preserves the clas-
ticity of the tissues; air is the draught of the furnace on

St


Page 28:
AMRITA

whose purity and sufficiency depends the perfection of the
combustion which supplies energy to the engine.

It is the general case that the great bulk of the waste
product of the body is readily soluble. There is therefore
no need to begin purification by applying the drastic reg-
imen of fire. It is easier and better in every way to wash
away that part of the dirt which can in so mild a manner be
disposed of. ;

We begin the preparation, therefore, of our patient by
the use of water in various forms. Generally it is best to
begin by a saline purge and diuretics; but in all cases there
is a course of Turkish and Russian baths, and sea baths,
followed by massage, with alternative applications of hot
water, ice, and alcohol. We thus removed from the system
the impure watery elements that it contains, and we re-
place them by repeated draughts of pure spring water.
During this period, we diminish the quantity of food as
much as possible without causing discomfort; and we give
only those foods which are most easily and completely
assimilable. We wish to diminish the violence of the body
to the utmost possible extent; to this end even such gentle
exercises as walking is discouraged. The body is urged to
allow itself to dissolve in the pure water. The brain is
similarly asked to avoid developing energy. Reposeful
conversation, soothing music, or the reading of such
books as go with laziness should occupy the mind to the
exclusion of all excitement or anxiety.

This regimen is followed until it becomes wearisome,
when it is replaced by its opposite, the purification by fire.
In this course, fasting is commenced on the principles ad-
vocated above; and, in order to insure the activity of the
liver, a cholagogue is (if necessary) administered at the
outset. Every effort is made to increase metabolism. Sun-
baths and electric baths are followed by massage with oil.
In the intervals, with short periods only of rest, exercise of
a character as vigorous as the patient can take is encour-

Re

The Elixir of Life (II)

aged. Mental stimulus of every kind is added to the physi-
cal. The patient is enkindled to ambition and constructive
thought. His diet consists of exciting foods, as plentiful as
appetite demands; but always of a concentrated character
so as not to overtask the digestion, and of such a kind as to
be assimilated without either straining the excretory sys-
tem or leaving an intractable residue. When symptoms of
fatigue occur, this regimen is suspended at once.

The third branch of the treatment is purification by air.
The patient is treated by jets of air at high pressure playing
upon his body; and from time to time, he enters a chamber
where the atmosphere, carefully freed from the presence
of carbonic acid gas and of moisture, contains a greatly
increased percentage of oxygen; some of this gas being
converted by an electrical machine into ozone. During this
period, the mind of the patient is left to itself, but the
general character of his remarks is recorded and studied by
the physician in charge, as it affords a valuable indication
of his state.

There is yet a fourth course of treatment: a negative to
oppose these three positives; the fourth element which
receives the influence of the other three is earth. The pa-
tient is then buried to the neck, of course in a recumbent
position, either in sand or in fresh soil. He is kept in com-
plete darkness, and the atmosphere of the room is super-
charged with carbonic acid gas. By this means he is made
to enjoy a rest and a sleep which shall give him as nearly as
possible that which men desire when in their utter weari-
ness they long for death or aspire to Nirvana.

It goes without saying that skill and experience are re-
quired in the physician. He must know with exactly what
degree of rigidity he should administer these treatments,
and be wise to divine the moment when one should be
substituted for another. His aim should be in no way to
inconvenience or to weary the patient, but patient and well
calculated alternations, to fortify him to endure constantly

33


Page 29:
AMRITA

increasing periods of a single type of treatment, especially
that which we have, perhaps somewhat fancifully, re-
ferred to as fire.

He will of course remember that the effect of any
hygienic regimen is often to externalize internal condi-
tions, to reopen the wounds which previous illnesses, long
since thought cured, have made in the patient. He will
treat such recrudescences as the case may require, and may
even deem it judicious to suspend temporarily the special
course of preparation. The observation of these symptoms
will moreover assist him in diagnosis.

Sooner or later, unless some essential organic weakness
be discovered, the patient will be found entirely free from
any of the impurities with which he began. Probably in
the course of the treatment he will have developed and
manifested a violent antipathy to one or more of the four
courses. This will have disappeared. He will be, not only
indifferent to, but happy in, any one of them.

His body will be found to exercise all its functions with
the greatest freedom and delectation. This state of things
will find its parallel in his mind, which will accept all
possible ideas without anxiety, craving, or bewilderment,
and with a simplicity of enjoyment somewhat like that of a
happy child whose confidence in the universe has not been
shaken by untoward experience. But this condition will
not be thus born of ignorance, but he shall have extended
the sceptre of his authority over the warring factions that
people his consciousness, and brought them into subjec-
tion both by perceiving their triviality and by understand-
ing his own superior rank and race.

With this serene philosophy, this penetration beneath
the mask of objective nature, this identification of himself
with a supreme reality, untroubled by illusions, set as a
spiritual wreath upon the brows of his victorious body, he
may now be considered as having reached the limits of his
natural possibilities, his body and mind are as healthy as

34

The Elixir of Life (II)

his constitution, his disposition, his inherited faculties, his
stored experience, and his age allow. He has rid his garden
and made a bonfire of the weeds grown in it from the
seeds of death and madness, but he has not destroyed those
seeds (perhaps he never can), and his garden, for all his
labor, is but his garden. The flowers that grow there are of
his own planting or his father’s; but that well tended
garden is now prepared as it was not when weeds choked
it, to receive the heavenly influence of sun and rain, or it
may be, to nurture alien seeds of rarer and more glorious
flowers.

This period of preparation being completed, we can
administer the Elixir without risk of mischief. In this sec-
ond period is the positive as in the former was the negative
portion of the treatment. After the Purification, the Con-
secration. After the subtraction of Death, the addition of
Life!

It is no part of our plan to unfit a person for normal life.
Were it in the power of this Elixir to prolong life indefi-
nitely, it may be doubted whether such an effect would be
desirable, from the point of view either of other people or
of the man himself. A complete understanding and mas-
tery of environment should prove in the long run a limita-
tion. Death is the fitting end of Life, and the wise would
neither hasten nor postpone it. The criticisms of Nature,
which spring so readily in the minds of the young and the
ignorant, are seen for the shallow partialities they are by
ancient Wisdom.

We do not, therefore, propose to continue the Elixir
indefinitely or even to defeat decay by extending through-
out life the periods of purification which were only justi-
fied by emergency. While the Elixir is being given, the
patient returns little by little to his regular diet and familiar
habits of life. The only exception is that in order to allow
the Elixir full freedom to act upon him, he cats only at
noon and sunset; so that the Elixir itself, taken at sunrise,

35


Page 30:
AMRITA

may both find the body reposed and hungry for it, and
also ready to attend to the business of absorbing it without
interference.

It is given at first in extremely small doses; and these
may be increased as the physician in charge of the case
thinks proper. The treatment will vary considerably ac-
cording to the special purpose for which the course is
being taken.

In the average case, the first effects noticeable are mental
and moral. There is a sort of restlessness, sometimes even
a little unpleasant; it is as if one had obtained something
which one was very anxious to use, and did not quite
know how to use it. With repeated doses, this condition
disappears. In most cases the mind finds itself capable of
formulating a clear image of the object which the Will
dumbly yearned to create. In such a case, the patient prob-
ably devotes himself with tireless enthusiasm to the real-
ization of that image.

Almost invariably, however, apart from any moral phe-
nomena of this sort, the spiritual vitality of the Elixir acts
directly upon the body and begins to recreate the tissues.
They have been freed from the alien substances whose
inertia would have opposed a physical obstacle to any ac-
tion upon them; and the Elixir lends them its creative
energy, awakes their own creative and re-creative powers.
The bones are no longer brittle; the muscles become tense
and elastic. Every tissue, even to the skin, recovers its
character, not so much of youth but of that period of life in
which the bodily forces, while still capable of growth,
have the wisdom of experience and the confidence of viril-
ity behind them.

But beyond this, there is an influx of the spiritual joys of
action for its own sake. As the poet may please himself to
write what none but he may read, or as the wild horse
gallops without knowing or caring where he is going or
why, so the patient cured, not only of physical infirmity

36

The Elixir of Life (II)

and weariness, but of the mental inhibition to actions
which comes from what experience has taught him of the
hopelessness of trying to do anything, and the worthless-
ness of success, becomes the physically competent and
mentally enthusiastic being, who is the vehicle of restless
energy, his doubts and weaknesses forgotten in the intox-
ication of life.

It is as a reflection on our universe that so admirable a
result should not suffice our conscience. Possessing the
Elixir of Life, strength, beauty, happiness, ours, for the
asking, we still question ourselves whether these things be
worth acceptance, and whether any circumstances, how-
ever cogent, justifies us in exercising our powers for our-
selves or bestowing their benefits upon another.

ALastor DE KERVAL
Knight Bearer of the SAcRED LANCE.

The treatments are carried out solely at the two principal
Profess-Houses of the Order, whose location is a strict
secret. The Order is wealthy, and no remuneration of any
sort is accepted; the patients are its guests from the begin-
ning to the end. The object of these present announce-
ments is solely to extend the benefits of the Order beyond
the limits deemed hitherto sufficient, recent developments
having made it possible to attend to a larger number of
cases than has till now been found convenient.

ALOSTRAEL
Virgin Guardian of the SANGRAAL.


Page 31:
The Order of the Purifications on
Waking

Akasha, Light.

Bathe eyes: ultra-violet. CE

Vayu, Air.

Breathing exercises: inhalations. ()
Apas, Water.

Baths, purges (“chair”) U
Prithivi, Earth.

Massage. Food. [_]

Agni (Tejas), Fire.

Sun-ray, infra-red, electric treatments, high
frequency. [U. & F.] /\

>Dddpe

! ’ 7)


Page 32:
Remarkable Experiment with the

Elixir of Life

I now began seriously to devote myself to research. “In the
bosom of the gnosis of the O.T.O.” is cherished a magical
formula, extremely simple and practical, for attaining any
desired object. It is however peculiarly appropriate to the
principal operations of alchemy, most of all the prepara-
tion of the Elixir of Life and the Universal Medicine.

At first I used this method casually. It was only when
various unexpected and even astoundingly successful op-
erations compelled my attention, that I devoted myself
systematically and scientifically to the serious study and
practice of it. For some two and a half years I had con-
ducted a careful and strenuous research into the conditions
of success. Experience had shown me that sometimes this
was complete, but at others partial or even negligible,
while not infrequently the work would result in failure,
perhaps almost amounting to disaster.

Before leaving for my hermitage, I had prepared by this
method an elixir whose virtue should be to restore youth,
and of this I had taken seven doses. Nothing particular
happened at first; and it never occurred to me that it might
be imprudent to continue.

I was mistaken. Hardly had I reached the hermitage
before I was suddenly seized with an attack of youth in its
acutest form. All mental activity became distasteful; I
turned into a mere vehicle of physical energy. I could not
satisfy my instincts by paddling the canoe which I had
imported. I spent about an hour every day in housework
and cooking; the remaining fifteen hours of waking life
were filled by passionately swinging an axe without inter-
ruption. | could hardly stop to smoke a pipe.

4


Page 33:
AMRITA

There was no self-delusion about this, as I might have
persuaded myself to believe in the absence of external evi-
dence. But this was furnished by an irrefutable monu-
ment. I wanted to build a wharf for my canoe. With this
object I cut down a tree and trimmed a twenty-two foot
log. Its circumference at the smaller end was too great for
my arms to meet round it. My only instrument for mov-
ing this was a wooden pole. The tree had fallen about a
hundred yards from the bank; and though it was downhill
all the way to the lake, the ground was very uneven and
the path so narrow that it was impossible to roll the log at
all. Nevertheless, I moved it single-handed into the lake,
where I fixed it by driving piles. Passers-by spread the
story of the Hermit-with-superhuman-strength, and peo-
ple came from all parts to gaze upon the miracle. I should
mention that in the ordinary way it is quite an effort for
me to shift a sixty pound load for even a few feet.

So much for the sufficiently remarkable truth. Of
course imagination improved on the story. I received an
indignant letter from New York from the lady who had
lent me the cottage, reproaching me for having built adam
right across the lake to the detriment of navigation!

This spasm of energy continued without abatement for
about three weeks, after which I gradually recovered the
balance of my normal faculties. The effect of my operation
was now to increase the energy of each of them, but in
reasonable proportion. I was now able to begin my pro-
posed magical research.

Strictly Private and Confidential

AMRITA
Experiment on A. C. begun January 23rd, 1933 e.v.
Interim Report at end of Week VI of the
Purifications.

Preliminary Notes.
(1) The conditions of the Experiment are very un-
favorable indeed, for the following reasons:—
(a) A. C. has neglected his health altogether for
some years past. There are several serious
troubles of long standing, in particular:—

I Asthma. V Stricture.
Il Bronchitis. VI Some Cardiac
i distress.
III Neurasthenia. VII Graying Hair.
IV Obesity. VIII Loss of Interest in
Sex.
(b) This neglect has been due to extreme distress

and anxiety, which still persist.

(c) The actual physical conditions suitable for the
Experiment are not available; there is also un-
certainty as to whether it will be possible to
carry out the Experiment at all, even in the
restricted manner devised to meet the situation.
It is altogether impossible to prepare the Elixir
properly until the above obstacles (a), (b) and
(c) have been entirely removed. The attempts
made to prepare it in the course of this six
weeks have been only partially satisfactory.

=
Q
oa

The Substitute-Purifications were carried out principally
by Mr. Archibald Cockren, at 142, Great Portland Street.
They consisted, for the most part, of:—

(a) Colon Massage.
(b) Loosening of the Vertebrac.

43


Page 34:
AMRITA

(c) Loosening of certain other bones, especially in
the region of the neck.

(d) Exposure of the head, arms and trunk to Ultra-
Violet and Sunlight Rays.

(e) Special treatment of the Scalp.

These methods were supplanted by A. C. in the following
ways:—

(a) A course of treatment by Uricedin.

(b) Certain secret methods of “Magick.”

He has not yet ventured to begin serious dieting.

Condition of the Patient at the end of the First Week:

Asthma. A little but not much better. Sleep con-
stantly broken up by fits of coughing up
phlegm-tough and yellow. These fits of-
ten proceeded to vomiting.

Nerves. Very much better, but still far from
good.
Stricture. Quite remarkably improved. Only reap-

peared for one short period (of hours
only) a week or two later.

Obesity. Abdomen still distended despite massage
and Uricedin.

Weight. 13 stone 6 lbs. = 188 lbs.

Age. 57 4.

The Second and Third Weeks show slight but regular
improvement. The main symptom of improvement is that
in the middle of the Third Week the patient was taking
enough interest in life to begin sexual relations. These
were difficult to perform and quite unsatisfactory in result.

On Thursday, February 9th, however, he prepared (in a
crude form) and absorbed a minute dose of the Elixir, of
that kind which vitalizes the reproductive powers.

44

AMRITA

On Friday, February 10th, he collapsed, chiefly owing
to an electric storm, to which he has always been over-
sensitive.

On Saturday, February 11th, after a second small dose,
he reports his sexual power almost fully restored.

After rest in bed during the whole of Sunday, February
12th—this is part of the regimen—he spent three nights of
the Fourth Week with his mistress. Week V, five nights;
Week VI, four nights—two days of this week were again
disturbed by depressing conditions.

Report at end of Fifth Week.

Sex Life very actively restored—on the day after the
second dose of the Elixir.

Stricture wholly gone.

Asthma somewhat changed in character but still persists.

Nerves: after the second dose of the Elixir his thoughts
became robust and juvenile. For instance, if snow were
threatened, he began at once to think of ski, and to wish
that he could go at once to snow countries. On waking
early he would not bewail his sleeplessness, but only that
in London there is no convenient means of going out and
taking exercise at the hour.

The pulse is now that of a man of 36, the spine is that of
a man of 40. The hair is now growing out quite black, and
new hair is invading the bald patch.

On Sunday, February 26th, he took a dose of the Elixir
especially prepared as against asthma and bronchitis. On
Monday morning he had the sudden feeling that he was
definitely cured—not merely that the condition was
improved—and when he arrived at Great Portland Street
this was found to be a manifest fact. (The only obstruction
left was to be discovered only on very deep expiration:
this, however, may make it necessary to administer at least
one more dose of the Elixir at a later stage).

45


Page 35:
AMRITA

At the end of the Sixth Week, the patient simply refused
to continue the routine of a day in bed on Sunday. He
went into the country and walked some seven or eight
miles, the last of these very fast, against time. This some-
what overtaxed his strength, and induced a long sleep in
the afternoon, followed by a rather disturbed night with
vivid dreams and a certain recurrence of the asthmatic
condition.

It is now quite proper for him to supplement the re-
gimen hitherto followed out by the special diets appropri-
ate to the Treatment. As, moreover, it has been found
satisfactory to administer the Elixir for special purposes
during the course of the Purifications, instead of only at
the end of the Six Months period, it is desirable to estab-
lish a small laboratory at once, where the preparations can
be properly carried out.

46

Additional Cases

Case 41-52 Anglo-Indian woman, wife of a merchant in the
Bombay Presidency. Heir badly wanted for reasons of
family, property and succession. Catamenia had ceased
for over three years. Husband proposed friendly
divorce.

The woman was in fine athletic condition, and was
able to receive the Amrita after only nine weeks’ pu-
rifications. The following day she was seized with vio-
lent abdominal pains, which subsided after two hours.

The treatment was continued in a modified form,
and a second dose administered two weeks later. The
former pains returned at once, and ended in a san-
guinolent discharge of very foul matter.

After another week a third dose was given. No pains
followed, but just six days later normal healthy men-
struation began. In two years and six months she gave
birth to two male children, and expected a third
pregnancy.

Case 73 Army officer, 54, long service mostly in India. Had
been impotent for over 15 years. Sports: polo and stalk-
ing in Kashmir. Old malarial subject: liver affected.

Iinsisted on change of climate before taking the case.
His health improved greatly. He proved to be a diffi-
cult patient, and needed the full six months’ course.
Four doses were administered in the 7th month. Poten-
cy was returned after the first dose, but not satisfac-
torily. After the 4th he was like an exceptionally strong
man of 40. Unfortunately he abused his powers, got
into the clutches of a loose woman, and took to drink-
ing heavily.


Page 36:
AMRITA

Case 33-16 Widow, 40, had been great athlete—golf, tennis,

hunting, winter sports. Her husband’s death five years
earlier had completely demoralized her. She weighed
15 stone 2 pounds, and cared for nothing but drink and
low companions. She was haunted by the fear of
cancer, which she had not got. Her physician sent her
to Dr. Alfred Adler, who tried to rescue her morally;
when she moved from Vienna to Berlin in 1931, he
asked me to continue the treatment.

I found her already so much improved by him that I
easily brought her to the point of intense will to regain
the integrity of her life. She was an excellent patient,
and lost 4 stone in 6—7 weeks. I was then able to begin
the purifications, and after two months to administer
the Amrita. She reacted splendidly; went back to sport
with enthusiasm and success, married within the year,
and is still happy with her young husband.

I saw her on a visit to England in 1937; she looks no
more than 35, though actually 46, and lives the athletic
life of a woman of 30. She has asked me to repeat the
treatment in three years’ time.

Case 20-42 Actress, 45, obliged to lead a too strenuous life,

involving irregular hours, and much drinking in polluted
atmosphere. Completely exhausted; nerves seriously
damaged; had finally been compelled to go to a “rest-
cure.”

She began to slip back almost at once, was sent to
me by her protector, a Wall Street broker, in 1918. She
was so bad a patient that it was impossible to continue
in New York; three months on a farm in Georgia
pulled her together. I was then able to apply intensive
treatment, and administer the Amrita two months lat-
er. She recovered her youth at once; her menstruation,
which had become irregular and painful, was com-
pletely restored.

In 1928 she was reported to me as very active and

48

Additional Cases

bright both mentally and physically; “a well-preserved
woman of 40,” though actually 55. She was killed in a
wreck.

Case 23-42 Ship-broker and Insurance Company Vice-

President, 65. A clean living, sound, healthy, open air
man. Came to me in 1919. The strain of the War had
aged him; his nerves were playing him false, he was
losing sleep, and his sexual powers were failing.

After six weeks I was able to give the Amrita; he
recovered his fullest energy, and successfully tackled
the business situation which had helped to age him. He
told me that he was now sexually a man of 40.

Ten years later he reported that he was still in full
possessions of all his faculties; but he had retired to a
hermit’s life on a ranch. He said that he wished to fade
out quietly rather than renew the treatment, as he had
no further worldly ambition, and was devoting him-
self to the religious life.

CasE 29-18 Civil servant, 60. Long sedentary and very

worrying work had destroyed his health. His retire-
ment at 55 left him in a backwater. In 1935 he was a
complete wreck.

He was a very good and conscientious patient, espe-
cially when, after the first fortnight, he regained hope.
But degeneration and atrophy were far advanced. The
full six months were required to prepare him and even
then the Amrita had to be administered with great
caution.

However, he recovered his interest in life, and his
physical faculties. He married an old friend, and went
off to live quietly and pleasantly in a Villa-farm in the
Alpes Maritimes. He expects to renew the treatment in
1940.

Case 25-17 Married woman, 30, tired of life. Good physical

condition, required only two months’ purifications.
The first dose of Amrita restored her to the full enjoy-

49


Page 37:
AMRITA

ment of her first youth. She is now tireless, and a
fountain of happiness.

Case 28-17 Married woman, 42, obese and idle. Bitterly
aware of failure to attract. Came to me in 1932. A good
patient, despite some lapses. Gave Amrita after 4%
months. She responded admirably. She is still, six
years later, sprightly, energetic and devastating.
Would not look more than 35, but makes up badly.

Case 33-27 Artist, 60, worn-out. Came to me in 1933. A
bad patient; required the full six months—which took
eight because of his lapses. I should have given up the
case had it not been for personal friendship.

He recovered his sexual powers, and the desire to
work. But years of excessive drinking had injured his
accomplishment. He is now a “bad 55” instead of a
“bad 65.”

Case 33-8 Chess player, 40, completely wrecked by drink.
Impossible to treat properly, as his moral character was
gone. Used emergency measures, more as an experi-
ment than a serious treatment. He won a very impor-
tant championship two years running.

Has since come into money, and cancelled his inter-
vals of sobriety.

Case 38-1 Philosopher, 62, sedentary habits. Had previous
treatment, very successfully, so attuned to the method.
One month’s purifications were ample, gave several
small doses of the Amrita. He now appears in the early
fifties, but leads the life of a man 35-40, and talks of
going back to athletic sports, abandoned twenty years
ago.

Case in progress.

50

IT

The following is a rough description of the product, its
use, and the way in which it works.

It needs to be supplemented by some account of the
inventor, his reputation as a Magician, etc., etc.

No, you are not old—not ugly—not ill-tempered!

How often you must wonder how it is that women who
possess all these disadvantages not only get, but keep, the
finest hold on the affections of those whom they wish to
attract and dominate, when youth and amiability and
beauty miss the mark.

Yet the answer to the puzzle is a simple one. It is
Charm, it is Fascination, it is that indefinable Appeal
which is crudely called IT that rings the bell.

Some people are born with it—the Gift of Pleasing.
Others lack it; and they, lacking it, lack all!

But cannot this missing Master-Key to Success in Life
be supplied? Has it no basis in the real material world? We
are not of that school of thought which holds that caprice
has any say in the counsels of Nature.

IT is not a vague phantasmal word, IT is not a mystical
way of pretending to explain ignorance: no, indeed, IT is a
definite substance which confers Charm, Fascination, and
Personality exactly as good food, fresh air, and whole-
some exercise bring health.

There is a physical basis of these qualities exactly in the
same way as Phosphorus is an essential ingredient of the
chemico-physiological compounds whose flower is
Thought.


Page 38:
AMRITA

This substance occurs in Nature in every human body,
but it varies very widely as to quality and quantity. But
where the quality is poor, or the quantity deficient, the
lack may be supplied artificially by the skilled chemist
through the preparation, compounded of analogous and
sympathetic substances, to which we have given the title
of “IT.”

All things powerful, from electricity to eloquence,
work in a subtle and often partly inexplicable manner, and
must be used with skill and caution to obtain the best
effects.

The method by which IT works is peculiar. IT does not
produce the desired effect if its use is suspected. For its
method of action is to arouse the Unconscious nature of
others, the hidden instincts which many so-called civilized
races train children as children to distrust. If, then, IT is
recognized for what it is, there may be set up a reaction
against, and a resistance to, its appeal.

It must therefore be rubbed into the body—particularly
at the roots of the hair where the skin is not too tightly
stretched—so thoroughly that the subtle perfume of the
preparation is not detected, or even suspected, by others.
The user is thus armed with a most powerful weapon, the
more potent for being secret, against the deepest elements
in the nature of those whom it is wished to attract. They
obey, and they are all the more certainly compelled to
obey because they do not know that they are being
commanded.

|

On Food

The question of preserving food has been recently put to
me from several quarters, and there should be no doubt
something like an official instruction in the matter; but the
general principles are clearly discernable from the doctrine
of the Sanctuary of the Gnosis.

This is a matter which has occupied me for very many
years, ever since I started exploration.

It should be evident to all Members of the Sanctuary
that the essence of thaumaturgy resides in the idea that
nourishment must be in some sense or other alive, sen-
tient, and capable of assuming its own character and per-
sonality. There are numerous hints on this subject in chap-
ter 12 of Magick.

With regard, however, to nourishment in the most
ordinary sense, without any consideration of thaumaturgy
at all except that to which reference is made in the Creed of
the Gnostic Mass, a few strictly personal and entirely un-
official remarks may be of use.

It is hardly a digression if I recount some of the observa-
tions which led me to an understanding of the traditional
doctrine of the O.T.O. First of all, Mexico 1900. We were
camping out on Iztaccihuatl at a height of 14,000 feet
and more, a day and a half out from the village of
Amecameca. We were therefore compelled to rely entirely
on canned provisions. These had been bought in Mexico
D.F. which was in those days far less contaminated by
civilization than since exploitation has become paramount.
The cans which we were able to purchase were some years
old. We had, of course, been accustomed to use a certain
amount of tinned stuff on small expeditions like that of

53


Page 39:
AMRITA

1898 on the Schoenbiihl glacier but those provisions were
first-class and quite fresh.

In Mexico we noticed almost at once an immense differ-
ence between the old and the new.

The next observation is dated the summer of 1902, the
journey to Camp 11 at Chogo Ri from Srinagar. This time
our provisions were all first-class but we noticed an im-
mense difference between the foods which approximated
to their original condition and what I may describe as
made-up foods. There was a thing called Bovril Bacon
Ration which we found simply uneatable. From my notes
on this journey I was able to provision the 1905 expedition
to Kanchenjunga in a perfectly satisfactory way although
at a cost of additional difficulties of transport. For in-
stance, we found that canned peaches and pears from
California were excellent. I did not take with me any dried
vegetables chemicalized out of all semblance to a natural
food which we had with us in 1902. For instance, the
Erbsuppe which was said to form the basis of the ration of
the German soldier (who had the reputation of being the
best man on the march in European Armies) proved not
only uneatable but unsatisfying. I came to the conclusion
that the form of food was an important matter. For in-
stance, there was a French product of vegetables called
Chollet of which we were able to make an excellent stew.
It was a kind of macedoine but no monkey tricks had been
played with the vegetables themselves beyond cutting
them up and allowing them to dry.

Now with regard to meat: there is a sun-dried beef
prepared (at least in North America) by strips of it being
placed between the horse and the saddle after having been
dried in the sun. On this meat we found we were able to
subsist in great comfort. The German name for it is
Bockfleisch; Biltong is a similar product, so is pemmican.
In every case it is the minimum of preparation which
yields the most satisfactory results.

S4

On Food

Now to come to the other side of the problem: the best
meat I have ever tasted in my life consisted of half-formed,
half-cooked, tough Himalayan mutton! The practice is to
buy your sheep—sometimes we had to pay as much as 4d.
for an animal not more than medium size—kill it on the
spot, cut it up and roast it on skewers over the camp fire or
on the ashes without a moment’s delay. We found this not
only much more tender but immensely more nourishing
than any meat otherwise cooked. Most people by the way
know of Steak Tartare, raw beef pounded and served with
the yolk of an egg, anchovies and other condiments. This
also is a first-class food.

About this time I had become interested, although not
very seriously, in Hatha~Yoga and I made one or two
small experiments with their special methods of eating. I
must here digress for a moment to describe one of the
practices. The pupil swallows his nine yards of turban,
inch by inch, and pulls it out again until the oesophagus
has acquired the peristaltic action of the alimentary canal.
Having got fixed in this practice he takes a bowl of rice
and (twenty minutes or so later) quietly rejects it without
spasmodic vomiting. It is said that an animal fed on this,
although it is in appearance no different from its condition
when swallowed, will starve. I did not care to undertake
the patient practice of this method of obtaining relief from
the troubles of digestion but I did put in a certain amount
of time conscientiously enough in absorbing my food, not
by swallowing but by deglutition. It took me three quar-
ters of an hour to eat an apple in this way but there is no
doubt about it, the apple was quite the equivalent of a very
hearty lunch.

I had put two and two together during this time and
presently it occurred to me to try the effect of eating living
food in this manner. So I sat down to a halfa dozen oysters
and put in about an hour eating them. What was my sur-
prise to find myself on the verge of intoxication! The vari-

55


Page 40:
AMRITA

ous experiments seemed to me conclusive as they were
repeated in various forms and the results always pointed to
the same conclusion—that there is some difference be-
tween live protoplasm and dead which is not to be de-
tected by any chemical or physical means at present at our
disposal.

My experience with the mutton indicated that the onset
of rigor mortis was, so to speak, the moment of death for
the spiritual substance of the meat. Suppose we call 100
units the full nourishment value of a piece of lamb. If that
lamb is cooked and eaten before rigor mortis sets in not
more than 10% (shall we say?) of that absurdly so-called
spiritual element disappears. For rigor mortis causes a sud-
den drop, one might estimate that anything from 40% to
70% of the full value vanishes suddenly. After that there is
still further loss, but it is slower and more gradual until
one gets to estimating in terms of years and fractional
percentages.

Let us now turn to the question of the different kinds
and degrees of nourishment in any given food. Much as I
dislike borrowing words from other sciences it is conven-
ient to speak of “voltage.” Birds have a much higher blood
temperature than mammals and assuming for a moment
that there is more in all these remarks than romantic guess-
ing, one would expect more energy to be supplied by
birds than by mammals. There is a good deal of difference
moreover in the quality of the energy; and here I think that
one may be guided not unreasonably by one’s sense of
taste. There is something in a woodcock which is not to be
found in a chicken from this aspect. The dull, pedestrian
birds do not appeal to the sense of taste as do game birds.
The whole atmosphere and ritual of eating is somehow
subtly different.

We may now turn our attention for a moment to cold-
blooded animals, fish and shell-fish in particular. It is cer-
tainly no fancy that made classical authors attribute im-

56

On Food

mensely stimulating powers to oysters, lobsters, crabs,
prawns, shrimps, lampreys, clams and the like. In the
Hebrew system of magic this class of animal is attributed
to the Qliphoth and their use as food is strictly forbidden.
It is evidently for the same reason as the flesh of a pig is
prohibited. They say that one is liable to acquire the gross-
ness of the pig if one eats him. There is little doubt that the
Hebrew Lawgiver was acquainted with trichinosis and to
eat pork in the tropics or even in hot weather in temperate
climates is actually dangerous, and to many people, in-
cluding myself, somewhat repulsive. But I think that the
magical theory weighed with him too.

I want to insist that one’s personal predilection in the
matter of flavor should be taken seriously. Nothing to me
is more certain than it “does no good” to eat unpalatable
food. I find this to be the case even when medical opinion
is strongly opposed. For instance, milk is supposed to be
very bad for asthma but my personal experience is that I
want milk and that it doesn’t make things worse but
better.

All cold-blooded animals are attributed to Mercury and
are sacred to him. The same is true of white wine; and
cultivated people have known for a very long time that
white wine, and no other beverage, is agreeable with fish.

Between the birds and the fish is a rather indeterminate
class which includes those excellent dishes, frogs and
snails. Here, perhaps because of our national unfamiliarity
with them in the days of youthful savagery, we are imme-
diately struck at the first sight with the magical qualities.

At a lower voltage still, to continue to use this absurd
terminology, are found vegetables and here again it is of
primary importance to eat them fresh and in their natural
condition as nearly as may be. The English method of
cooking vegetables is notoriously a crime. With regard to
the suitability of any particular vegetable, taste is once
more the only reasonable guide. Truffles and mushrooms

57


Page 41:
AMRITA

in particular may be classed with shell-fish and when one
is confronted by some vegetable hitherto unfamiliar one
can make a very good estimate of its effects by comparison
of its taste with that of things known. When you have
chewed ginseng for a little you will know what I mean.
But even more with vegetables than with animals it is
important to observe the form, the shape in which Nature
has offered them to us. As you are no doubt all of you
aware, Trithemius and Baptista Porta as well as Paracelsus
produced a whole body of doctrine from what they called
“signatures.” Similar doctrines obtain in the Far East. It is
well to study these matters; but the results of such study
should be no more than the basis of one’s own experi-
ments. It is quite probable that many of you will be eager
to disagree with me on many points. A large number of
people like things mashed and mingled; and some are so
lost to all good sense that they really imagine the products
of Nature can be improved by chemical manipulations.

Pulping of vegetable matter is generally speaking to be
deprecated. Consider only the question of papers; the
wholesale mechanical pulping of wood is destructive to
the intimate substance, and paper prepared in this way is
quickly perishable.

In my view what has been said about rigor mortis can be
said ten times over with regard to modern commercial
bedevilment, and the pernicious nonsense about calories
and vitamins. An enormous amount of latitude must,
however, be allowed for personal predilection. It is en-
tirely wrong to try to govern other people’s tastes—a
complete violation of the Law of Thelema. I make a point
of saying this because it might be supposed, from what I
have written about, that I like eating vegetables raw. This
I do not except in special cases such as onions, celery,
fennel and that group in general. There is something re-
pulsive in eating raw carrots and turnips and the like; but

58

On Food

there is no reason to suppose that for those who like them
they may not be the best form of nourishment.

Taking the whole of the above together and throwing it
into the witch’s cauldron, we come at last to the main
subject of this rather random dissertation—preservation.
One should aim, first of all, at preserving the food as
nearly as possible in its natural state. To take one example,
the best meat food I had on my second Himalayan expedi-
tion was the Poulet de Bresse cooked whole in its own
jelly. Of course, this preservation makes all the difference
to the question of weight and where transport is impor-
tant, an essential matter in times of emergency like the
present. But personally I would rather go without food at
all than eat food which has been, from the point of view of
the doctrine of the Gnosis, completely destroyed. Where
meat and vegetables have to be dried, they should be dried
in the sun. It is not at all the same thing as drying them
over sulfuric acid, and destroying the essential fibrous sub-
stance. When this has been subsequently bloated with
water—at that, water from a tap—it is by no means the
original substance.

There are a number of fish moreover which lend them-
selves to preservation. Eels, for example, and white fish.
Also herrings and sardines suggest themselves imme-
diately to all of us. Above all, turtle and beche-de-mer
lend themselves to the process of drying. Some again,
such as salmon, may be cured and smoked. Here again,
there is something in the flavor and the structure which
speak in their favor. Cod is preserved in immense quan-
tities but to be palatable as far as Iam concerned at least, its
flavor, or lack of it, has to be disguised by highly-seasoned
Spanish cooking. Gross, heavy, amorphous flesh is a bad
sign; and so is flesh which is flaky and watery. This is why
tunny, of which one can make excellent grilled steaks, is
very tedious when tinned.

59


Page 42:
AMRITA

Another point to be considered is that of air. Librarians
know that books need light and air as much as animals.
They soon become withered if they are kept without
them.

This naturally would depend upon the length of time, as
in the case of the prehistoric tins which we took from
Mexico City; but even where tins are necessary there is a
great difference between products whose natural form has
been preserved, and those from whom the protection of
their natural state has been withdrawn. Thus, peaches are
much more satisfying than pears; for their substance is
more resistant. A comparatively little shaking breaks up
the form of a pear, whereas peaches will stand almost
anything. But even so, the question of light and air comes
once more to the front and J have found that as a general
rule bottled fruit is better than canned. Neither, however,
is so satisfactory as the simple preparation by drying in the
sun.

To these general observations there are obviously many
exceptions; but the general tendency of these remarks will,
Ihope, prove helpful to Members of the Order in selecting
food for themselves or for those whom they wish to nour-
ish with practical kindness.

To conclude, these points become of quite serious im-
portance when operations are actually contemplated.
Those of you who have read Moonchild will have noticed
with what exclusive care Iliel’s diet was arranged, and how
Brother Onofrio dealt with the Vongole.

60



Page 43:
This edition has been designed by R. Williams. The types
are Centaur and Bembo. The typesetting was done by
The Composing Room of Michigan, Inc. Printed
by Thomson-Shore, Inc. on 60 lb. Glatfelter.
Trade edition binding by John H. Dekker
& Sons with Holliston Kingston
cloth. This edition is limited
to 1,000 copies of which
thirty-three are espe-
cially handbound
and numbered
1 through
33.



